This episode is brought to you by Brilliant!
We often imagine a future in which the Moon
is inhabited, with domes and outposts scattered
around it’s surface, but what does a truly
developed and colonized Moon look like a thousand
years from now?
So today we are returning to one of our favorite
places in the Universe, our nearest neighboring
world, our own Moon, to contemplate the idea
of a late stage colony of the Moon when it’s
reached populations as high or higher than
Earth itself currently has. We’re going
to ask what the Moon would be like if it was
home to many billions or even trillions and
what pathway might lead to it becoming a single
massive worldwide mega city… what we call
an Ecumenopolis.
This is not our first time visiting the Moon
here on SFIA, I try to get an episode in about
the Moon and Mars each, about once a year
or so, and for the Moon we began Moon Base
Concepts back in early 2016, then Industrializing
the Moon, Battle for the Moon, Moon: Industrial
Complex, Moon: Crater Cities, Return to the
Moon, and then last year, Mars First vs Moon
First. In all those episodes and as side topics
of many others, we have discussed how to get
a base on the Moon and grow those to be real
cities and colonies, and some of the possible
long range fates of our Moon.
How to make the Moon a titan of industry fueling
our expansion into space. How to terraform
the Moon so it’s green and blue in spite
of its low gravity, and even how to raise
that gravity by putting an artificial small
black hole in its center. And we’re going
to begin by discussing those last two options
in conjunction before moving on to look at
making the entire Moon one vast, three dimensional
sphere of a city.
However, when it comes to those last two,
terraforming the Moon and altering its gravity,
it ignores the development of communities
there and the problems of terraforming a built-up
and colonized Moon, and it ignores that raising
the gravity on the Moon would alter its geology.
Terraforming an inhabited world is just not
the same as a dead one. The internal meat
and bones of a world are based around a certain
gravity, multiplying it sixfold to Earth-normal
gravity would be ruinous to everything there
including buildings we previously made. That
can be managed but it’s a pretty big hurdle
especially given the structures and locations
most sensitive to a change in gravity would
probably be all the old historical early buildings
we made there, as well as an early domed ecosystems
whose organisms had had the most time to adapt
to low gravity.
What’s more, terraforming a planet is inherently
destructive to the existing landscape. As
an example, everything we call a ‘mountain’
on the Moon is really a giant crater rim wall,
or portion of one, they are tall and sharp
and would never last on Earth where gravity
and air and water would bring them down in
short order.
On the Moon, those ideal first bases are expected
to be in the bottoms of those craters, and
we would expect those to be the foci of further
colonization, hence why we did an episode
called Crater Cities, but if I terraform the
Moon, then those deep craters valued for the
ice we suspect is at their bottoms, now become
lakes and seas, right over top of the original
cities. Now they could persist under water
as domed cities but that rather defeats the
purpose of terraforming the Moon so they can
get rid of their domes.
The Moon can never really keep air and water
we put on its surface, without constant and
major replenishment, the gravity is high enough
that random room temperature air or water
molecules won’t go anywhere, the escape
velocity of the Moon is around 5 timers higher
than the speed the air molecules would be
moving at, but even Earth leaks with an escape
velocity almost 5 times higher than the Moon’s,
and that leakage rate would scale exponentially
as you dropped the mass. So you either have
to dome it all over – which is certainly
an option – or you raise that gravity and
just buttress the world, or you pay a constant
replenishment cost of running megafreighters
of nitrogen in. So raised gravity seems the
best of the three options. We have a few problems
though, the first and most obvious of which
is that we don’t know how to make artificial
small black holes, we just have some guesses
as to how it might be accomplished. I would
also guess that as fast as the Moon might
leak air, even without a protective magnetosphere,
which we could add, that it would still be
small compared to the amount of mass needed
to raise the gravity.
Assuming we can make small black holes, then
one big advantage that planets that utilize
them have over normal planets is that they
can be made of super abundant materials like
hydrogen, helium, or potentially even dark
matter; meaning you don’t have to use up
all your rarer building materials like iron
and carbon and and nitrogen and silicon on
generating gravity. Indeed the main value
of hydrogen and helium, which make up virtually
all the normal matter in space, is to make
energy out of them or to make heavier elements
via fusion. As we’ve discussed before, black
holes are vastly better and more efficient
power generators than fusion – and indeed
better at nuclear transmutation of elements
too. So you can stick a small black hole in
the center of a world, in a hollowed-out chamber,
buttressed via active support, and slowly
grow a black hole by dumping hydrogen and
helium into it, and use that generated power
to run your world.
Now to make the Moon have Earth-like gravity
on its surface doesn’t require as much mass
as the Earth has. The Moon masses only 1.2%
what Earth does, but has 7.4% of the total
surface area, and when you’re aiming for
gravity equal to Earth on some sphere shaped
object, the total mass something needs, to
have Earth gravity, is directly proportional
to its surface area. A tenth the area, a tenth
the mass of Earth, a hundred times the area,
a hundred times the mass, like Saturn, whose
surface gravity is very close to Earth’s
and which has about a hundred times the surface
area and mass of Earth. This technique works
on any world, be it some tiny asteroid a few
kilometers across or some sprawling mega-Earth
a few million kilometers across, see our episode
Mega-Earths for more of the details on building
and engineering such worlds.
So the Moon masses 1.2% of Earth and would
need 7.4% of Earth’s mass to have Earth-like
surface gravity. This means we need to add
6.2% of Earth’s mass to the Moon via such
a black hole, or 5 times its current mass,
which makes it rather debatable which is being
added to which, given the black hole would
be more massive. Not bigger though, such a
black hole would be 1 millimeter wide. Which
is actually very large for an artificial micro
black hole and makes feeding it regular matter
so much easier.
Now less gravity would probably be fine for
people, Mars’ gravity might work fine – and
if you’re curious, this black hole trick
would work fine on Mars too – but has the
same problem for terraforming there. The Moon’s
surface gravity would now be 100% of Earth’s,
but its escape velocity from the surface would
still be lower, 5.8 kilometers per second,
more than twice its current value but still
only half of Earth’s and about 20% higher
than the escape velocity of Mars. Mars has
no real atmosphere or oceans but we suspect
it might have in the past, and the gravity
was enough to keep them for long times but
not for 4 billion years, so that extra 20%
might be enough or it might just slow the
escape down to billion year timelines which
is good enough for terraforming – nothing
lasts forever be it a planet or a megastructure
or a hybrid of the two, you need to replace
and repair. You could go bigger too, expanding
the Moon to be a hollow shell of Earth size
and mass, making Earth a genuine double planet,
and we will come back to that later in the
episode.
Now the other problem is that black holes
are great power generators. You can add mass
straight into one, in a way that wouldn’t
cause power release, but if you are generating
power while adding mass, you’re getting
somewhere between 20-40% of the mass energy
of that matter released as energy. So you’re
potentially talking about releasing something
like the current entire mass energy of the
moon in the process of feeding it up to Earth
Gravity. You’re not exactly being wasteful
by skipping power generation either, all that
energy isn’t free. If you convert 20% to
energy on the drop into the black hole then
you need 20% more mass to get that desired
final mass. Whereas, as we’ll see in a moment,
even slowly adding in the last 1% of mass
over a billion years would easily power the
Moon that entire time.
See a Moon-Mass of energy is 6.5 x 10^39 Joules,
which is half a million years of solar output,
or the amount of sunlight that falls on Earth
alone in a quadrillion years, or the Moon
in 14 quadrillion years. And that sunlight
is what keeps Earth and the Moon warm, so
even just adding that mass energy in at the
same rate the Sun gives it to those worlds
would mean roasting the folks on it by doubling
their power input, and would take 14 quadrillion
years, fully a million times longer than the
Universe currently exists.
Now we might be building for those kinds of
timescales. Black Hole powered civilizations
regard the normal starlit era of the Universe
that will persist for the next 100 trillion
years as that irritating early period of the
Universe where big clumps of useful fuel were
inefficiently burning away their value of
their own accord and exploding when they were
done. 100 Trillion years is nothing to their
timescales and they have the energy efficiency
to outlast all the stars in the Universe a
trillion times over again.
Nonetheless it’s a long time for us to wait
and so you would presumably be adding that
mass in a lot faster to a black hole in the
center of the Moon or some other planet, and
I suspect trying to get it in there and quickly,
is not going to be a clean process with no
energy produced, so this trick is likely to
need to be a slow one. Or you could make it
far away and move it there but that has its
own very tricky issues, since you can't magically
turn off its gravity or inertia when they’re
inconvenient. Probably anyway, for all we
know we might find some gravity or inertia
manipulating technologies and if they’re
possible then I’d think they’re likely
to be discovered before the Moon is home to
billions of people. I’m not optimistic on
such technologies but regard them as vastly
more likely than FTL or Time Travel. Once
you’re at a good mass though, you can keep
adding mass at the rate you want for its energy
and using it to power your civilization, just
the last percent of a percent of the desired
mass would power you for trillions of years.
And so this is one path to a future Moon,
one in which it has had its mass raised and
had oceans and atmospheres added to it. Earth
is not unaffected by the Moon gaining 5 times
its current mass but that is manageable and
you could be using a little of that mass and
energy to push the Moon a bit further from
Earth to keep the tides on Earth of similar
intensity. Or you could build sister Moons
into a Kemplerer Rosette around the Moon or
rebuild the whole moon as a big donut around
Earth. You could also increase earth's own
mass, as we looked at in our culminating episode
of the Earth 2.0 series, Matrioshka Worlds,
where we envisioned an Earth with layer after
layer of hollow spherical shells each artificially
lit and full of land and sea, sharing the
same mass for gravity on many surfaces.
Which is another possible fate of the Moon,
as such a Matrioshka World, and indeed given
you would be adding so much mass to the Moon
to do all of this, a Matrioshka layer of nested
spherical worlds would seem more likely than
a single shell, especially as while the Moon
is low in mass compared to Earth, it’s made
of mostly the same stuff as Earth’s surface
– this is the major reason why we think
the Moon was formed by ancient collision tearing
much of Earth’s surface off. The Earth might
be 80 times the mass of the Moon but the Earth’s
crust is only around 1% of Earth, so you could
turn the Moon into a earth-crust-thick shell
as big as Earth’s crust and still have mass
to spare, and of course could make thinner
layers given you don’t need a crust that
thick. You just disassemble the Moon and rebuild
it as a shell around a black hole of Earth’s
Mass.
The nested shell Matrioshka version might
be more popular though given that the Moon’s
month long day and night already require artificially
lighting, hence underground or lower layer
habitation is probably easier to sell to people.
Of course the Moon could also be spun up to
a 24 hour day but the energies involved in
that are also pretty enormous.
And this is another fate for our Moon, disassembly,
possibly for some world building, possibly
to build a fleet of a trillion colonization
vessels to sail out and claim the galaxy,
possibly to build a swarm of O’Neill Cylinders
and other space habitats and infrastructure
around Earth, which is easier without the
Moon swinging around gravitationally perturbing
everything. Hence why other artificial moons
or a Donut Moon around Earth might be popular.
Now we did not raise all those other scenarios
strictly as alternatives to our Moon slowly
turning into one vast city or Ecumenpolis,
but rather, many are roads we might follow
at the same time. For instance, every city
needs its parks as well as its ports, and
it’s possible a lot of Moon habitation and
industry will be underground for safety but
that early domes on the Moon would be about
landing ships or having gardens, where losing
one to a cracked dome represents less of a
loss and risk compared to a home or school
or office, and such a habit might persist
into a future that sees the Moon terraformed
on its surface but principally inhabited below.
The key notion whenever we discuss domes on
airless worlds, incidentally, is that while
one meteor slamming in at kilometers per second
could blow a dome to pieces and kill everyone
inside, those would be rare and easier to
detect and destroy with point defenses, and
be vastly outnumbered by smaller rocks and
pebbles wearing or cracking a dome or blowing
a dime sized hole in one. Air leaks into the
vacuum of space at roughly the speed of sound,
so a dome the size of a football field with
even a fist-sized hole in it to the vacuum
is not causing everyone to collapse suffocating
or get sucked through the hole and turned
into sausage on the way out. Plus such domes
probably have thin wire mesh in their panes,
or a layer of plastic like with shatterproof
windows, not some big sheet of glass that
would shatter. Nonetheless it would seem unlikely
many folks would feel comfortable living and
sleeping directly under a big dome without
additional layers, like being underground
would offer. And again there’s no 24 hour
day there, it gets dark for two weeks in a
row and sunny for two weeks, maybe not something
folks want to live under. It's hard to guess
but at the very least, early on we would expect
a lot of Moon colonization to be buried in
the sides of craters, or under them, or in
the vast lava tubes underground, and artificially
lit.
From this, especially with Earth probably
growing its cities ever more vertical and
other space habitats being essentially rings
or cylinders you live inside, we might assume
an underground growth on the Moon and downwards
would be popular from the outset.
Skyscrapers are much easier to build on the
Moon due to the low gravity, lack of air,
and lack of Earthquakes, but they are exposed
to being hit too. Truth be told, a skyscraper,
especially something in the arcology megascraper
zone, are vastly more resistant to meteor
strikes than a big dome is, and more so if
you have a bunch of these scrapers under a
dome but still connected via their own protected
or air tight tunnels, you have a lot of redundant
protection for folks on the surface living
in them. You can also have some clever features,
like a cannon that shot airbags at cracks
in the dome if the dome punctured, or that
shot at folks exposed to the vacuum and encapsulated
them in an air bubble and protective sheath.
Those people also might be effectively immune
to being spaced into a vacuum, due to being
covered in smart matter like we’ll discuss
next week or being rather transhuman and cybernetic.
We’ve looked at all sorts of other safety
features spaceships, space habitats, and dome
colonies might employ down the years too.
So I don’t want to give the impression that
surface-living on the Moon and surface cities
are not viable unless the place has been terraformed
and with a black hole crammed in the middle.
Still, while building up is easy, so is building
down. Excavating on the Moon is easy, the
regolith is nasty stuff full of sharp edges
that are rough on equipment but the gravity
is lower which makes everything else about
excavating and building down easier. For that
matter, Stanford developed an interesting
vine-like growing machinery that might get
around that whole regolith cutting and ripping
issue.
Keep in mind, we have lavatubes on the Moon
in which you could fit football fields, and
which can be many kilometers long too, and
it's not that the moon forms those better
than Earth, it's that lavatubes, especially
big ones, have more problems lasting on Earth
with earthquakes and water and air and gravity.
Digging down and building up are easier on
the Moon, but the big difference is that when
you’re digging down, you are surrounded
by tons of rock that’s fairly airtight in
its own right and easily covered with a sealant
to minimize small leakage. On the surface,
building up, you either build under a big
pressurized tent or you build then pressurize,
and unless you built very thick, meters, not
centimeters, odds are good you’d be springing
leaks as you pressurized that building, or
found them when the tent around it was removed.
Now, that low gravity lets you not only build
taller or deeper more easily than on Earth,
but it also lets you contemplate heights and
depths you never could on Earth. There’s
no end of atmosphere on the Moon, it’s got
none, so all the buildings need to be pressurized
anyway and they’re not getting hammered
by wind and storms. Or earthquakes, there’s
much less of an infernally hot mantle below,
which makes building deeper easier because
there is much more crust than on Earth. We
do believe the Moon has a liquid iron outer
core and mantle but far smaller and deeper
down. Of course running into magma and lava
monsters isn’t the real limit on building
deep on Earth, we max out much shallower.
We usually put the limit on cave depth at
about 2 miles or 3 kilometers underground
because of the pressure of overlying rock,
and we do have some mines as much as 4 kilometers
deep but these are almost exclusively gold
mines, because tracing a vein of gold that
deep is about the only thing worth the effort
of trying to excavate, shore up, and maintain
such a tunnel for.
Something to keep in mind is that even your
air is getting compressed down there by air
above, and can be twice the pressure of that
up here on the surface, and has to be pumped
down refrigerated, into an insulated shaft
to make it a bearable temperature for the
miners. Now robots may do better one day but
that doesn’t interest us much for living
accommodations, but since gravity on the Moon
is a sixth of Earth’s, we could go 6 times
deeper before the air rose to that pressure.
What’s more, there’s no air on the Moon
so it’s not leaking down through various
cracks to raise that air pressure. If I take
a big jug of water, the pressure at its bottom
is higher than it is on top, and if I place
another jug on top of it, that jug presses
down to raise that pressure further. However
if instead I sit them on a shelf, one below
and one on the shelf above, then the one above
does nothing to add to the pressure. With
that in mind, on the Moon you can circumvent
that pressure issue by just having air locks
– which you would have anyway – separating
levels every so often, maybe every kilometer
at most. And thus your pressure need not rise
as you go deeper, and even at its core the
Moon is only thought to be about 1300 to 1400
Celsius, or around 2500 Fahrenheit, where
as Earth’s core is about 5200 Celsius or
9300 Fahrenheit, nearly as hot as the photosphere
surface of the Sun.
And that means you can build very deep on
the Moon, indeed we do have metals able to
withstand that core temperature, many of them.
The pressure might be harder though, especially
in conjunction with temperature, as its core
pressure is about 45,000 atmospheres. Which
is nothing compared to Earth’s core, which
is 80 times higher at 3.6 million atmospheres,
but that’s still about 10 times the pressure
at the bottom of the Kola Super Borehole that
got 12 kilometers deep. Still it's inside
the realm of what we can plausibly do, even
without some of the more extreme methods we
looked at in our episode Accessing the Earth’s
Core, which means even a tunnel right through
the middle of the Moon is viable.
For those who have seen the movie Total Recall,
the reboot rather than the original, you might
recall they had a train shaft that went right
through the center of the Earth between Europe
and Australia. There’s not much reason to
do such a project on Earth but it works much
better on the Moon, you just drop down a shaft,
and you will accelerate as you fall – especially
if it's already a vacuum – and gravity gradually
decreases as you fall, until it drops to nothing
at the core then reverses, so the same gravity
that sped you up, slows you down on the way
back up to the other side of the tunnel, which
theoretically makes this manner of travel,
cost you no energy at all, though in practice
you’d probably need a little to overcome
friction on the train system.
Now on Earth that means a journey of just
40 minutes and maximum velocity of 8 kilometers
per second, which is roughly the same as low
orbital speed right over our atmosphere and
that is not a coincidence since both have
to do with falling around the planet. Orbital
Speed right over the Moon’s surface is 1.6
kilometers per second and that’s the maximum
speed you’d reach falling through a shaft
bored right through the Moon, all the way
down to the center and back out again. The
time it takes to fall, assuming a sphere of
uniform density, is π times the square root
of the sphere’s radius divided by the gravity
at the surface, and is a formula that dates
all the way back to Sir Isaac Newton and his
original work on gravity, physics, and calculus.
Needless to say, worlds are rarely of uniform
density but it tends to give a decent approximation,
and for the Moon, with a radius of 1.7 million
meters and a surface gravity of 1.6 m/s²,
that gives us a time of 3250 seconds, or 54
minutes.
Weird that it takes longer than on Earth right?
Well not really, the Moon isn’t as dense
as Earth, the denser the sphere the faster
you fall through it, something that is pretty
handy if you’re trying to build black hole
wormhole gates. For this same reason a satellite
right over the Moon actually takes longer
to orbit it than one right over Earth does,
for all that Earth is much bigger. If you’re
curious, it's 42 minutes on Mercury too, which
has about the same density as Earth even though
it’s about a twentieth our mass, just over
a third our diameter, and has only 38% of
our gravity. Your fall time – or orbit time,
as it is basically just half an ultra-elliptical
orbital path - rises with the square root
of the radius, but surface gravity of a uniform
sphere is dropping with the square of radius
from gravity weakening with distance and rising
with the cube of radius as it encompasses
a bigger volume and thus more mass, so that
surface gravity of a uniformly dense sphere
rises with the radius, double the radius,
double the surface gravity.
Thus your orbital period or drop times are
rising with the square root of the radius
divided by the radius, or it washes out. A
big sphere of Earth’s density but way bigger
radius has that same drop time, however, density
is altering gravity linearly, twice the density,
twice the mass in a given sphere, twice the
gravity, but it’s still under that square
root, so drop time falls with the inverse-square
root of density, 40 minutes for Earth, about
half that for something 4 times denser and
twice that for something a fourth as dense,
which would generally be your icy moons or
dwarf planets like Pluto.
A little bit of physics and gravity sidetrack
there but the show is called science and futurism
and I am a physicist so I like to sneak some
in when I can, don’t worry, there’s no
quiz.
In any event, these kinds of tunnels don’t
actually have to bore all the way through
the core, they can run at tangents through
a planet like if you jammed a needle through
an orange, in one place and out the other,
regardless of if it passes through the core.
The problem is, on Earth, that orange peel
is still proportionally thicker than our crust
so these sorts of gravity trains are not really
practical on Earth. You’re not really getting
up to bullet speed for trains running at a
maximum depth of maybe 4 kilometers requiring
hyperstrong vacuum tunnels. In truth it wouldn’t
be a needle straight distance either, your
shortest-time tunnel in a case like this is
a hypocycloid, a curve rather than a straight
line, and allows us to contemplate, on a place
like the moon, gravity train tunnels all over
that world, that move you around it very quickly,
right from the bottom of one crater city to
another, far away.
Now why does this matter? Well my thinking
is that if you are building crater cities
and connecting each to each other by such
hypocycloid tunnels, for quick, easy and safe
travel, then much like any highway with exit
ramps or train path, you might have build
ups near and on these, especially as it's
not hard to stop the train part way through
and store some drop energy. It’s not like
interstellar travel through a vacuum where
stopping cost and starting part way through
the journey cost you as much as the original
journey, this costs you no energy, and since
you’re presumably dropping down an electromagnet-covered
shaft, there’s a number of options for low
or no energy turns and stops including utilizing
a simple flywheel, which work great in a vacuum.
These are your fastest paths too, including
launching up into space and back down again,
except for some of the extreme and fuel-crazy
options we contemplated in our High-Tech Search
and Rescue episode.
We’re also talking maximum speeds of about
a kilometer a second here, after a drop of
10 minutes, as that would already put you
300 kilometers down under the surface, deeper
journeys could get you all the way up to that
1.6 km/s orbital or core speed but even at
100 kilometers deep you have already hit 353
meters per second, just over the speed of
sound here on Earth, and truth be told, it
doesn’t take much energy to stop or start
in a vacuum with something to grab on and
shove off of. A one-ton car going at that
speed has a kinetic energy of just over 60
million joules, half a gallon of gasoline.
So we’re not talking a ton of energy to
stop for a pause and get back going even if
the system doesn’t include regenerative
braking options and such.
This means along those big hypocycloids between
the bigger crater cities, or lavatube cities
for that matter, you are likely to have a
lot of pit stops like you do on highways.
This decade’s pit stop becomes next decade’s
truck stop and then a town and then maybe
a city in its own right. So we could easily
see a big expansion all over the surface of
the Moon, like we discussed in battle for
the Moon, while at the same time we had an
ever growing number of these tunnels and the
growing habitation around them. All the more
so because these are great places to put a
long skinny rotating cylinder to serve as
rotating gravity spots so that residents or
visitors could experience gravity closer to
terrestrial standards.
One other thing driving this expansion is
that folks live on the Moon for a reason and
the big reason would seem to be mining raw
materials, and such hypocycloids represent
very low energy ways to launch spaceships
too, they are very easily modified to serve
as a mass driver or space catapult. It would
not be surprising to see mining follow along
these paths to get dual use as basically creating
a highway or freight line while producing
the valuable ores that will be feedstock of
a lunar economy.
Now, speaking of localized gravity, I suppose
it’s only fair to point out that a single
big black hole isn’t the only option for
gravity on the Moon. If you’re good with
your black hole generation you could have
dozens of smaller ones forming a grid beneath
a city on the surface giving it higher gravity
locally. You can do this same trick on high-gravity
worlds to lower gravity in a city by suspending
them above it and it absolutely works on paper
but has always struck me as way more dangerous
than a single big one at your planet core,
or moon core. These can be used for power
generation as needed and indeed if they are
small and numerous enough, they could generate
power via Hawking Radiation. One able to provide
Earth-like gravity a hundred meters away generates
a few hundred watts that way, and you could
potentially make a floor of them in some hexagonal
grid layout every dozen meters or so, so that
might give you a nice plane of gravity and
power generation.
This is one trick for artificial gravity plating
like we see in science fiction and generally,
gravity will not drop much as you get higher
from those plates until you are as high or
higher than the plates are wide as a whole.
Lookup calculating the gravity of an infinite
flat plane if you want that explained, we’ve
already done a bit more math today than I
prefer our episode’s contain. So as long
as your city is at least as wide as it is
tall you can use a giant plate full of micro-black-holes
for gravity generation. Note that on the surface
of the moon this would mean you would have
an upside-down under city where the gravity
was 67% of Earth normal but pointed upwards
and outwards, not down, since your plate is
presumably generating less than Earth gravity
as the Moon provides some too, and it's subtracting
it instead of adding it when upside down.
So there are potentially some weird tricks
for making coin-like cities with heads and
tails, on or off planets, or hanging over
top one too. All right, one other note on
gravity before we move to why the Moon might
become a Mega-city. Expansion of a planet,
by digging down and hollowing it out and using
that material to build higher levels, lowers
pressure and gravity as you hollow it out
and make it wider. That makes your gravity-drop
tunnels slower by a bit, as you make your
world bigger and less dense. Note that having
all your gravity at the core in a black hole
makes the drop faster than a uniform sphere
of the same mass too. However as folks core
out the Moon to make more living space and
mine it all, it is likely a lot of the spoil
will be moved back up to the surface for construction
and on long timelines and with vast industrial
might, this starts getting you the many-layered
Ecumenopolis or even Matrioshka World setup
we sometimes contemplate as Earth’s eventual
fate.
So we build down, down in craters and lavatubes,
deep into their rim walls too, and slowly
as population rises we build deeper and wider,
and merge. All at the same time you’re piling
on new layers above, making the whole world
structure more artificial and sturdy, and
potentially bringing in cheap mass from elsewhere,
be it liquid hydrogen or helium or black holes,
to add mass, if you want to.
How many people could comfortably fit in the
Moon if we made it a three-dimensional city?
Tricky question as we always have the fuel,
food, and heat issues, not to mention as you
hollow it out to make homes, that excess material
can be used to make more homes on higher levels.
It’s current volume is 22 x 10^18 cubic
meters, or 22 billion-billion, and the typical
apartment might be as little as 220 cubic
meters and hardly uncomfortably tiny, at that,
so that you could squeeze in 100 million,
billion people, a number that even a Dyson
Swarm would find respectable, but in truth
more the sort of number we would expect as
the upper end for an entire CisLunar or Earth
Hill Sphere Planet Swarm, see our episode
on Colonizing CisLunar Space for more explanation
of that.
We’re not really contemplating packing people
in to endless apartments on the Moon anyway,
but would probably instead use a figure more
like 10 trillion, as it represents the high
upper end of what the Moon could get rid of
as heat, even if rather expanded in radius,
from many layers or radiating super-towers
being added, while still giving its people
on the order of 10 kilowatts a piece for comfort,
hydroponic food production, commerce, etc.
You could go higher in energy needs for fewer
people or lower maybe, especially if the people
are getting pretty post-human like cyborgs
or digital uploads, but let’s settle to
10 trillion. If we optimistically assumed
10% of the human population lived on the Moon
at that point and the human population grew
like it did in the 20th century or the last
20 years, doubling twice a century, then that
human population of 100 trillion might be
reached in as little as 8 or 9 centuries,
near the dawn of the fourth millennium.
And personally I would have a hard time imagining
a terraforming project that might take many
more millennia to make the Moon blue and green
would be allowed to override those efforts
and expansions, so that at most, the world
surface might look that way, covered in garden
domes, super-spire buildings, and spaceports,
while the juggernaut lay below.
Now it’s popular in science fiction to portray
Mars as some giant empire breakaway from earth,
like the US is often seen as being for Europe.
Or even as dual empires of roughly equal footing,
such as we see in The Expanse or the Warhammer
40,000 settings, and usually, if the Moon
is mentioned at all it’s as the footnote
or, perhaps properly, as a small satellite
power. But in truth the Moon’s role in the
future is likely to be bigger and brighter
than Mars. If any world is likely to ever
rival Earth or even come near it, it will
be our own Moon, not Venus or Mars or some
world around Alpha Centauri. It may make itself
mighty by slowly extracting matter to build
itself and its economy, fueling the push to
develop a vast solar empire and a vast collection
of industry and habitats in CisLunar Space,
all while importing cheap matter, such as
hydrogen or helium, to increase itself in
mass.
Here though we see an option where the Moon
might rise to be a true double planet to earth,
its twin and peer as we settle the solar system
and galaxy beyond.
So we have a few announcements and our upcoming
schedule for April to get too, but first,
we were doing some math today to calculate
how big a black hole needed to be to emulate
Earth-like gravity on the Moon and we do try
to keep how much math we do during an episode
on the light side. Watching science videos
like ours is a great way to get an overview
and learn the basics of different topics,
but to gain an understanding of “why”
and “how” concepts work the way they do,
you have to try it yourself, and for that,
I recommend heading over to Brilliant, today’s
sponsor.
Brilliant is an interactive STEM-learning
platform that helps you to truly understand
concepts in math, science, and computer science
by guiding you through engaging, hands-on
courses.
Now a lot of folks who watch the show love
our topics but think of themselves as bad
at math, and they’d love to know more but
don’t think they can. Many of us learned
there was only one “right way” to approach
things like math, but in Brilliant’s new
Everyday Math course, that’s not the case.
Exercises like finding the areas of shapes
will show you that there are many ways to
solve a problem, and the visual and interactive
solutions will help you understand the concepts
even better.
And don’t worry if you’re busy—lessons
are presented in bite-sized pieces, so you
can learn at your own pace in a no-pressure
environment. To get started for free, visit
brilliant.org/isaacarthur or click on the
link in the description, and the first 200
of you will get 20% off Brilliant's annual
premium subscription.
So this is the first episode I’ve produced
since I got back from my trip to Santa Monica
to speak at the Rand Corporation's US-Japan
Space Cooperation Conference about 2 weeks
before this airs. The conference was a lot
of fun and dinner at the Japanese Consulate
afterward was spectacular in cuisine, conversation,
and courtesy. I think I came up with a dozen
different episode ideas while listening and
chatting with others, particularly Pete Worden
from Breakthrough Starshot. The man’s a
legend and he deserves the status.
The opening keynote on Day 1 was David Kipping,
who a lot of you know from the Cool Worlds
Lab and Channel, and we ended up chatting
for a couple hours afterward while burning
time for our flights home and for everyone
who's watched his channel, yes he is every
bit as insightful and pleasant to talk to
as you’d expect. If you haven’t seen his
show, and especially if you’re a Fermi Paradox
fan, check out his episode “The First Civilization
to Emerge in the Galaxy”, his narrative
on that episode is spellbinding, and don’t
forget to hit the like and subscribe button
while you’re there.
Speaking of fellow science creators and on
a sadder note, I also wanted to express the
condolences of myself and the SFIA team to
Anton Petrov on the recent loss of his baby
boy Neil Apollo Petrov. I can't imagine anything
worse than that and since I know we share
a lot of audience, I’d just ask everyone
to continue to give him your kind words and
support during this hard time.
It’s been a rough couple months for many
folks on the back of what seems to be just
a brutal last couple years of virus-driven,
emotional-grinding change and hardship, and
I try not to sugar coat how hard times can
be on this show even though we aim for an
optimistic tone and I do believe in a brighter
future if we work hard for it. Stormy weather
brings the rain that makes the flowers grow
and there’s a light at the end of the tunnel.
Admittedly sometimes it feels like the light
at the end of the tunnel is actually a freight
train getting ready to run you over. I’ve
a feeling that this is going to continue to
be one of those kind of years, and its important
to stay strong, keep to your courage and convictions,
and just keep working to a better world, and
not to let events weigh your head down so
much you forget to see the good moments along
the trip too.
There is a lot of future to look forward to
as well, and we’d best get to it by finishing
up our schedule of episodes so we can finish
up this episode. We’re almost finished with
March too and we’ll close it out this weekend
with our Livestream Q&A followed by a look
at Programmable and Smart Matter on March
31st. Then we’ll open up April with a look
at the concept of Self-Growing Space Habitats
and Bases. After that we have our scifi sunday
episode, Multi-Species Empires, followed by
asking what would happen if Earth lost the
sun and became a rogue planet?
Now if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe
to the Channel and hit the notifications bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below. You can also join in
the conversation on any of our social media
forums, find our audio-only versions of the
show, or donate to support future episodes,
and all those options and more are listed
in the links in the episode description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!